As a result of the financial strength of the
developers' financial support, which was
Gibraltar Savings, which is the largest savings
and loan in Texas, at that time had assets of over $8
billion, they were able to master plan the entire
development and put in all of the major
infrastructure in phase one. So what was proposed
was a new community of some 65,000 to 80,000 people
that would be within the jurisdiction of
McKinney, which is a town of 18,000 people, which,
believe it or not, has more historical structures
than the city of Galveston. Is that right? It's a
quaint, fascinating little town that has some
very progressive staff that has the character of
some wonderful 19th century architecture in
urban form. Where is it located? It's straight
north of Dallas on Nile. Highway, past Plain 75.
Yes, just north of Plain. So I was hired in
association with a financial consultant to
organize and lead a negotiation team that would
negotiate the approvals of these development
proposals. It was envisioned that this
development would have, as I said, 65,000 to
80,000 people, three 18-hole golf courses, seven
lakes, nine schools, hundreds of miles of
streets, three fire stations, perhaps a new city
hall, and a sports board of other community
facilities and infrastructure improvements
that would be required for that development. As a
result of Again, the experience of
infrastructure planning and the financing
requirements on the one hand, and knowing a bit
about the role of city planning and growth
management, and having a little experience in
negotiation, we were able to negotiate what I
believe was the largest development agreement in
the history of Texas. And in a matter of 90 days...
Larger than what role? Well, the Woodlands was not
a development agreement. It was just a
development. But this was a negotiated
agreement, an actual contractual agreement
between the city of McKinney and the developers of
Flying M Ranch in Gibraltar City. Contractual
agreement that required a series of quid pro quos.
The city would provide, would annex and provide
certain zoning. And the developer would install
certain infrastructure. and other community
services in a whole medley of amenity
packages, if you will, that would allow the city
to, as it quadrupled in size, to maintain a quality
of urban services and quality of urban form that
would be commensurate with what the city had
before. It was on the order of magnitude of eighty
odd million dollars worth of improvements that
were negotiated and agreed upon. And it involved
numerous firms working for the city as well as for
the developer to bring all this together. But it
was, I think, to be a very profitable project for
the developer to have all this comprehensively
planned. And for the city it was
the benefit of comprehensive planning on a scale
that most cities never had the opportunity to do,
let alone sign on the bottom line. What has been
their experience since signing? I have not been
able to monitor it because I quickly got involved
in some other water-related projects. But I think
those three examples represent this whole new
dimension of planning that we coined as
negotiated growth management, which involves a
lot of the experiences that people talk about
today in terms of mediation and dispute
resolution, negotiation, getting to yes, as one
book calls it, and the basic physical planning and
financial planning dimensions that I think urban
planners need to understand anyway. I keep asking
myself, but isn't this what has always happened?
And aren't we just using new buzzwords for
something that has always been processed? And I
don't know what the answer to that nagging
question is. I know that MIT and Harvard and the
joint program up there are heavily involved in
negotiation. And certainly, I think that
planning education, getting back to that a
minute, has always been somewhat neglectful of
the role of relating the planning process to the
decision process in a way that makes it clear to
students how they must react and respond to
decision makers and those that they deal with. I
think that's one of the weak points of the A&M
program, with the exception of people like Jim
Gardner, who has always been in it and has run for
city council successfully several times, and can
speak with total authority on that subject. But I
personally have I asked the question when I've
seen some of the new articles coming out on the
subject of negotiation and conferences being
held on negotiation and so forth. What's new about
it? Well, I didn't mean to say that what I was doing
was innovative, but I think the nuance that has
really become a standard operating procedure
only in the last two or three years is what is often
called development agreements. These are
negotiated agreements between the public and
private sector. They're not ventures. to see what
can be done by a civic-minded developer in an
entrepreneurial-oriented city necessarily.
But it's what was normally a clash between the city
struggling with how it can manage and sometimes
control growth on one hand, and the developer that
sees the regulatory milieu as a maze and a series of
obstacles that often require hiring lobbyists to
overcome.
What has come out of the projects that I've been
involved in is a negotiation process that is very
legal in nature. It comes out with contractual
agreements based on hedging the risk for the
entrepreneur and securing a lot of the amenities
that cities often never are able to get
commitments for. until the citizens are already
there begging for it. I'm also leery of too many
lawyers meddling in planning, and I cite as an
example the American Law Institute's Model Land
Development Code, which would have reduced the
process that you're describing to simply written
briefs, and everything would have had to be in
writing, and everyone would have had to be
committed to the gills before any contact was
made. Which is not financially feasible the way
the banks operate. It didn't leave much room for
exactly what you're interested in, negotiation,
because everybody's position would have been
hardened before there had been any confrontation
at all. That's a good point. And I feel that
resolving it through discussion, negotiation,
whatever you want to call it, exchange of ideas and
trade-offs, is knowing what the position of the
government agency is in terms of its goals and
objectives and policies is certainly the way to
go. But case in point is an attorney would never
fathom the idea that a contractual agreement
would have the ability to be evaluated and updated
and monitored over time to allow appropriate
revisions to be made at various milestones, which
is really what planners always require in order to
keep something from getting so outmoded that you
have to just throw the whole damn thing out. And so
in these negotiated agreements, those updates
and abilities by mutual agreement to revise
things and plan for that ahead of time was
something that, again, attorneys really had to
struggle to find the boilerplate language to put
it down. That would have been amusing. You may not,
I don't think you agree with me on this, that the
American, well the Model Land Development Code I
think failed miserably in not requiring a plan
diagram to be a part of an adopted comprehensive
plan. Well, I think plan diagrams are very
important for a couple of reasons. Anytime you're
talking about land, real property, the ability to
communicate that is essential in terms of
people's ability to relate what they own to what
the police powers are going to do. be affecting
what they own and what other people own. And maps
are communication devices. Well, you know, the
Austin Tomorrow Plan did not do this.
Well, they did it at such a gross and small scale
that it had no import to the individual property
owner. That's all right, but I don't think that
they did it really. They had growth corridors
established, which is quite a different matter.
And it didn't show a circulation system. And it
didn't show a lot of things that a plan diagram
would show. Nor did it deal adequately with the
implementation strategies. Very weak in
implementation. But I think the biggest failing
of that plan, and it's true of a lot of other plans
too, is that the commitment of subsequent city
councils was not there to fund it through capital
improvements program. Without those bottom line
dollars supporting those plans, there's no way
for a developer to see the benefits of the city's
ways.
Well, pressure started to build up regarding the
plan and its perceived restrictive nature. And
that was apparently enough to kill it. So they've
started in with an entirely new planning program.
Ken, thanks very much for your time and your input
to this program of the American Planning
Association Texas Chapter. This tape will be
transcribed and God only knows when that will
happen. The right things are going at the moment,
but eventually you'll get a transcription which I
will then look for you to make changes in. Any
additions or deletions that come to mind at that
time would be gratefully appreciated. And we'll
then put it back onto the computer disk and run out
our final hard copy. Thanks again. Thank you, Bob.